Comput. & Ops. Res.Vol. 13, No.5, pp. 533-549, 1986
Printed in Great Britain. All rights reserved

FUTURE

0305-0548/86 $3.00+ 0.00
Copyright @ 1986PergamonJournals Lid

PATHS FOR INTEGER PROGRAMMING
AR TIFI CIAL INTELLI G EN CE

AND LINKS TO

FRED GLOVER*

Center for Applied Artificial Intelligence,Graduate School of Business,University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO 80300,U.S.A.
Scopeand Purpose-A summary is provided of some of the recent (and a few not-so-recent)developments
that otTer promise for enhancing our ability to solve combinatorial optimization problems. These
developmentsmay be usefully viewedas a synthesisof the perspectivesof operations researchand artificial
intelligence. Although compatible with the use of algorithmic subroutines, the frameworks examinedare
primarily heuristic,basedon the supposition that etTective
solution of complex combinatorial structures in
somecasesmay requirea level of flexibility beyondthat attainable by methods with formally demonstrable
convergenceproperties.
Abstract-Integer programming has benefitedfrom manyinnovations in modelsand methods.Some of the
promising directions for elaboratingtheseinnovations in the future may be viewedfrom a framework that
links the perspectivesof artificial intelligenceand operationsresearch.To demonstratethis, four key areas
are examined: (1) controlled randomization, (2) learningstrategies,(3) induced decompositionand (4) tabu
search.Each of theseis shown to havecharacteristicsthat appear usefully relevant to developmentson the
horizon.

1. INTRODUCTION

Integer programming (IP) has gone through many phasesin the last three decades,spurred by the
recognition that its domain encompassesa wide range of important and challenging practical
applications. Two of the more prominent landmarks in the development of the field have
undoubtedly beenthe emergenceof the cutting planeand branch and bound approaches.As general
solution strategies,theseapproacheshave drawn on conceptsfrom diverseareasincluding number
theory, group theory, logic, convex analysis, nonlinear functions, and matroid theory [1-1].
From the theoreticalside,cutting planeshavereceivedthe greatestattention, though from a broad
perspectivethe distinction betweencutting plane and branch and bound methods blurs. Indeed,
branch and bound may be viewed as provisionalcutting. From the practical side,the most effective
generalpurposemethodshaverelied heavily on branchand bound, conceivingbranchand bound in
its standard (narrower) sense, where the collection of provisional cuts derives simply from
constraining integervariablesto satisfylower and upperbounds. Dosesof cutting plane theory have
beenusedto improve the basic branch and bound framework, chiefly by generatingcutsto be added
before initiating the branchand bound process(or in somecasesjust prior to selectinga next branch)
[8-14]. The cuts used,however,are typically those that are easilyderived and generated.The more
labyrinthine and esotericderivations have not so far demonstrated great practical utility.
Implicit in cutting methods and branch and bound methods are the allied notions of problem
relaxation and restriction (enlargingand shrinking the feasibleregion) [15-20]. Problem relaxation
has found particular application by meansof the Lagrangeanand surrogate constraint strategies,
both of which have achievedtheir greatestsuccesses
on problems with specialstructures [21-25].
Indeed,it is oftennoted that the chancesof developinga widely effectivegeneralpurposemethod are
slim. Many of the interesting practical IP problems have very evident specialstructures, and the
diversity of thesespecialstructuresis sufficientthat a proceduredesignedto do well for one of them is
very likely, on the basis of experiencein the field, to do poorly for many others.
This is not to saythat certain principles,adaptedappropriately to different settings,may not prove
of wide value. On the contrary, a growing collectionof suchprinciplesmarks preciselythe direction in
which the field ofIP methodologyis evolving. We have alreadyinherited a numberof thesefrom the
*Fred Glover received the doctorate from Carnegie-Mellon in 1965,and served on the faculty at the University of
California, Berkeley. and the University of Texas and the University of Minnesota. He is the author of over 150 published
papers in ManagementScienceand related fields.
533

534

FRED GLOVER

fundamental early developments:as representedby the "cutting plane principle", the "Benders
partitioning principle", etc. It is also increasingly evident that modeling is especiallyimportant to
practical application, not only for its links to solution efficiency,but equally for its role in fostering
understanding and communication. Notable contributions to this area are provided by models
associatedwith disjunctive programming [6, 8, 15, 26-30] and network-related formulations (or
"netforms") [24, 31-34].
The emergenceof strategiesthat can be adaptedto take advantageof diverse problem conditions
marks what I believe to be the wave'of the future in IP, giving us power to solve a significantly
increasednumber oflP problemseffectively.Current indications point to the opportunity to obtain
near-optimal solutions, by tailoring principles to specialstructures,for problems involving many
thousandsor evenmillionsoflPvariables [21, 23,24, 35]. Clearly, suchan outcome would havebeen
unthinkable in the not so distant past.The blend of heuristicsand algorithms (viewing heuristicsfrom
a perspective that transcendssome of those commonly embraced)opens the possibility of a
continuing streamof "surprises" of this nature. Integerprogramming, seenasone of the most difficult
and challenging of fields, is evolving into one that promises to yield a remarkable collection of
successfulcasehistories.
The foundation for this predictionderives,perhapssurprisingly,from the recentremarriageof two
disciplines that wereonce united, having issuedfrom a common origin, but which becameseparated
and maintained only looseties for severaldecades:operationsresearchand artificial intelligence.This
renewedunion is highlighting limitations in the frameworksof each(ascommonly applied,in contrast
to advocated),and promises fertile elaborations to the strategies each has believed fruitful or
approaching combinatorial complexity.
Rather than arguethis point abstractly, or attempt to trace historical threads to give due credit to
which strategic frameworks or perspectivesowe more heavily to the influence of AI or OR, I will
describea few of the strategiesthat appearto hold promisebasedon experiencecurrently available,
and speculateon future directions.
As prelude to this undertaking, it is worthwhile to ask why theoretical advancesin IP methods
have not more frequentlyled to correspondingcomputational advances.One possibleansweris that
the critical incrementof theory that will lead to computational breakthrough lies just beyond our
reach, and will soon be discovered.A more likely hypothesis,I suspect,is that a procedure with
special convergenceproperties, demonstrable by theorem and proof, must be somewhat rigidly
structured-and this must imposelimitations in turn on performance.Beyonda point, flexibility can
be the enemyof theory, for it allows the crucial "if-then" chain to be broken. Yet rigidity can be
equallythe enemyof effectivesearch.In the faceof combinatorial complexity, there must be freedom
to depart from the narrow track that logic single-mindedlypursues,even on penalty of losing the
guarantee that a desireddestinationwill ultimately be reached.("Ultimately" may be equivalentto
"a day before doomsday" from a practical standpoint.)
In brief, effectivestrategiesfor combinatorial problems can requiremethods that formal theorems
are unable to justify. That is not to say suchmethods lack "structure". Complete flexibility has its
parallel in complete randomization, which is scarcelya usefulbasis for complex problem solving.
Methods that are "intelligently flexible" lie in someyet-to-be-definedrealmto which theorems(of the
familiar sort) do not apply, yet which embracesenoughstructure to excludeaimlesswandering.We
currently face the challengeof identifying featuressharedby the more promising membersof this

realm.
Perhapsthe most conspicuouslimitation of a heuristic method for problems involving discrete
alternativesis the ability to becometrapped at a local optimum. Ifwe broadly allow a local optimum
to include referenceto solutions that are infeasible,then it is reasonableto saythat local optimality is
the crucial issue for a good heuristic approach to wrestle with.
From this point of view, it is usefulto organize the exploration of good methods for discrete
problems around strategies for transcending local optimality. Of the variety of heuristic
classificationsthat might be discussed,I will focus on four: (1)controlled randomization, (2)learning
strategies,(3) induced decompositionand (4) tabu search.Theseclassifications,while not by any
means exhaustive,are conjecturedto be particularly relevantto developmentson the horizon.

I

IP and links to artificial intelligence

535

2. CONTROLLED RANDOMIZATION

Controlled randomization is perhapsthe oldest strategyfor seekingto overcomelocal optimality
in combinatorial optimization, and classicallytakestwo forms. The first is the well-known "random
restart" approach,which injectsa randomizing elementinto the generationof an initial starting point
to which a heuristic is subsequentlyapplied. (The approach may alternately be conceived as
employing two heuristics, the outcome of the first providing the starting point of the second.)
Depending on the nature of procedure for obtaining such a starting point, the "randomizing
element" may be more systematicthan random: for example,one may chooseequally spacedvalues
of a parameter along an interval rather than randomly sample such values from a selected
distribution.
The secondclassicalversionof this approachis the "random shakeup" procedurewhich, insteadof
restarting, periodically generatesa randomized seriesof moves that leads the heuristic from its
customary path into a region it would not otherwisereach. (The term "random shakeup" is used in
preferenceto "random perturbation" becausethe degreeof departure may be more significant than
perturbation usuaHyconnotes.)In the framework commonlyemployed,a criterion is establishedfor
differentiating a move as improving or nonimproving (though a broader "multicriteria" framework
has beenfound usefulin [35]), and the purposeof the randomizing elementmay be viewedas that of
admitting nonimproving moveswhich would normally bedisregarded.The point at which to activate
the randomizing element(for example,waiting until no improving movesare available)is a choice
rule of the procedure.
Recentlya specialcase, or more properly a refinement,of the random shakeup approach has
attracted a good deal of attention. Called simulatedannealing,this procedurehas beenheraldedas a
new and powerful methodology for combinatorial problems, with implications for the field of
artificial intelligence[36, 37]. The name "simulated annealing" derivesfrom the intent to pattern the
approach after the physicalprocessof annealing,which is a meansfor reducingthe temperatureof a
materialto its low energyor ground state.Sucha state maybeviewedasanalogousto an "optimum ",
whereon the energy level may accordingly be viewed as the value of an objective function to be
minimized.
The annealing processbegins with a material in a melted state and then gradually lowers its
temperature,analogousto decreasingan objective function value by a seriesof "improving moves".
However, in the physical settingthe temperaturemust not be loweredtoo rapidly, particularly in its
early stages.Otherwise certain "locally suboptimal" configurations will be frozen into the material
and the ideal low energystate will riot be reached.To allow a temperatureto move slowly through a
particular region corresponds to permitting nonimproving moves to be selectedwith a certain
probability-a probability which diminishes as the energy level (objective function value) of the
systemdiminishes.Thus, in the analogyto combinatorial problem solving, it is postulated that the
path to an optimal statelikewisebeginsfrom one of diffuserandomization, somewhatremoved from
optimality, where nonimproving movesare initially acceptedwith a relatively high probability which
is gradually decreasedover time.
The form of the processfor the purposeof simulation maybe specifiedasfollows [37,38]. Potential
movesof the system,viewedas smalldisplacementsfrom its presentstate,are examinedone at a time,
and the changec in the objective function valueis calculated.If c < 0,indicating an improvement,the
moveis automaticallyaccepted.Otherwisethe moveis acceptedwith probability P(c)= exp( -c/kT),
where T is the current objective function value (temperature)and k is a constant adapted to the
application (Boltzmann's constant in the physicalsetting). The heuristic adaptation of k at different
levels of T is referredto as creating an "annealing schedule".
In spite of the publicized successof this method, an interesting study [39] disclosesthat it has
noteworthy limitations in application to the traveling salesmanand p-medianproblems. Intuition
strongly suggests,however,that a successfuladaptation must be done with a somewhatcharitable
latitude to depart from the publicizedframework. For example,in the implementationof [39], which
was highly faithful to the simulated annealing framework, the solutions used for a basis of
comparisonwere those obtained after a certain elapsedtime, rather than the bestobtained through
all stagesof the process.While a material may stabilize at an "optimum" ground state after a~

536

FRED GLOVER

sufficientduration, an analogousstabilized condition for generalcombinatorial systemsseemsquite
unlikely. In particular, fluctuations away from an optimal solution are apt to be significantevenin the
"combinatorial vicinity" of sucha solution. If this supposition is true, simulated annealing would
undoubtedly benefit by a modification that does not rely on a strong stabilizing effect over time.
(Under assumptionswhich imply an appropriate stabilizing effectexists, simulated annealing and
"Markov generalizations" can be shown to yield an optimal solution with probability 1 after a
sufficient numberof iterations at eachlevel[40]. The implicit required effort hasnot, however,been
shown better than that of complete enumeration.)The approachof [36], for example,acknowledges
the shakinessof the stability assumptionby introducing a final phaseto seeif any improved solutions
appear during some additional time increment after reaching the supposedlystable area.
Thereare also other reasons,however,to maintain a healthyskepticismabout the appropriateness
of simulated annealing for discrete optimization-a fact which makes the approach all the more
interesting if the claims of its effectiveness
are widely substantiated.In spite of its heraldedrelevance
to artificial intelligence,there seemslittle about the method that is "intelligent" in the usual sense.
Reflection on the way a human might proceed, for example, leads to a somewhat different
organization. It is reasonableto postulate that human behavior resemblesthe simulated annealing
processin one respect:a human may take "nongoal directed" moves with greater probability at
greaterdistancesfrom a perceiveddestination. (Similarly, an animal on the hunt, when confronted
with a relatively weakscent,is inclined to wanderto pick up additional scentsrather than to zero in
immediately on a particular target.) Yet the humanfashionof convergingupon a target is to proceed
not so much by continuity as by thresholds. Upon reachinga destination that provides a potential
"home base" (localoptimum), a humanmaintains a certain threshold-Dot a progressivelyvanishing
probability- for wandering in the vicinity of that base.Consequently,a higherchanceis maintained
of intersecting a path that leads in a new improving direction.
Moreover, if time passesand no improvementis encountered,the humanthreshold for wandering
is likely to be increased,the reverseof what happensto the probability of acceptinga nonimproving
move in simulated annealing over time. On the chance that humans may be better equipped for
dealing with combinatorial complexity than particles wanderingabout in a material, it may be worth
investigating whether an "adaptive threshold" strategy would prove a useful alternative to the
strategy of simulated annealing. At this time the question is open.
3. LEARNING

STRA TEGIES

The ability to learn is generally regarded as a fundamental attribute of intelligence. Learning
studies that were applied to discrete optimization problems as long ago as the 1960suncovered
interesting conclusions,not widely known, which suggestfruitful directions for investigation.
Scheduling

An early study devotedto the job shopschedulingproblem [41] examinedtwo types of learning
schemes.In the first, probabilities wereassignedto selectingvarious local decisionrules at different
stagesof the solution process.The approachthengeneratedmultiple solutions to the sameproblem,
sampling from the decisionrules on the basisof the given probabilities. By comparingthe quality of
solutions obta~ned,the procedure "learned" how to improve its own performance-which it
accomplishedsimply by revising the probabilities to favor rules that were selectedmore often in
obtaining the bettersolutions. Successof the probabilistic learning schemewas verified by its ability
to find solutions superior to those obtained either by applying its component decision rules in
isolation or by simple random sampling among theserules.
The second type of learning strategy was prompted by a "bow and arrow" analogy which
suggestedpossible limitations to the probabilistic learning scheme. In this strategy, evaluation
criteria underlying local decisionrules were viewed analogous to criteria that might be taken into
accountin archery-e.g. wind direction,distancefrom the target, draw of the bow and so forth. To be
effectivein archery,all suchrelevantcriteria would be takeninto accountsimultaneously,rather than
in a piecemeal"probabilistic" fashion that accommodatedonly a single criterion at any given time.
(The latter approachwould likely assurethat an archerwould neversucceedin hitting the target!)
Correspondingly, following this principle, a composite decision rule was sought for the job shop

IP and links to artificial intelligence

537

schedulingproblem that would simultaneously
accommodatethe variouscriteria implicitly contained
in standard local decision rules. This was achieved by a parametric method for integrating the
different component rules, and the strategy undertook to learn good parameter settings by the
approach of systematically varying their values over successivetrials, keeping track of the
combinations and directions that worked best. The composite strategy vindicated its premise by
matching or improving on the bestknown solutions for eachof the testproblems of the study. (More
recentsupport for usingcompositeframeworks has beenprovided by an approachof [35] that allows
different criteria to "vote" on potential moves.)
Traveling

salesman problems

A somewhat different type of learning strategy has been applied to the traveling salesman problem
in [42]. To generate trial solutions that provide the raw material for learning, the approach used the
standard 2-0PT heuristic for traveling salesman problems [43], but other methods to produce trial
solutions could be used as well (e.g. [44-47]). The approach was based on an adaptation of the
familiar notion that "good things share common features". More specifically, it was supposed that at
least one exceedingly high quality solution would contain subsequences of nodes in common with
some subset of the best heuristic trial solutions (obtained by applying the heuristic for different
random starting points). As a test of this notion the procedure was designed to select the three best
trial solutions obtained in an initial series of runs, and then to identify their intersecting subsequences.
These subsequences were compelled to lie in each starting solution generated thereafter, and to
remain intact throughout a given run until no improving moves were otherwise available. The
resulting exploitation of "learned commonalities" produced solutions superior to those obtained by
an equal number of runs of the basic heuristic on its own.
An expanded framework for this type of learning is embodied in the characterization of "strongly
determined" and "consistent" variables in [48]. A variable may be called strongly determined,
relative to some form of sensitivity or "post solution" analysis, if an assigned value (or assigned
bounds) cannot be changed except by producing a significant deterioration in solution quality. By
extension, a variable may be called consistent if it is strongly determined at a particular value or
within a narrow range in some collection of good trial solutions. (For the type of constructive
procedure that makes projections from incomplete assignments, as by solving problem relaxations to
obtain trial values for unassigned variables, the "good" solutions may not satisfy all conditions of
feasibility at early stages of construction.)
There is clearly a healthy latitude in the possible operational specification of what makes up a
consistent variable. Experimentation and context determine whether a variable should be regarded
as more consistent if it strongly receives a particular value in three out of five cases, or if it less strongly
receives a value in four out of five cases. Segregation of types of solutions may accommodate the
possibility that a variable may be strongly determined at one value in some solutions, and strongly
determined at another value in other solutions. Consideration of clusterings and interactions among
subsets of variables provides logical ways of extending the concept. (It is of course possible to bypass
reference to strongly determined variables and simply define consistent variables in terms of the
statistical frequency of particular value assignments in selected solutions.)
The motivation for identifying consistent variables, by extension of the rationale underlying the
traveling salesman application of [42], is based on three conjectures: (1) a variable that is highly
consistent over a subset of good solutions is very likely to receive its preferred value-or to lie within
its preferred range-in optimal and near-optimal solutions; (2) once some variables are assigned
specific values or constrained to narrow ranges, other variables that seemed not particularly
consistent will now become a good deal more so; (3) the operation of imposing narrow restrictions on
selected variables will yield increasingly reliable measures of the relative consistency of remaining
variables, given the imposed restrictions. These ideas lay a foundation for constructing more
ambitious learning procedures both in the traveling salesman setting and in broader discrete
optimization contexts.
An I P goal programming

application

Still another learning approachinvites consideration, particularly for the fact that it has proved
uniformly unsuccessful
in a number of variations. Experiencewith the approach provides a useful

538

FRED GLOVER

object lesson about the sensitivity of a learning method to the right blend of components. The context
of this application is an integer goal programming problem involving the minimization of deviations
from a set of targets. The problem may be paraphrased as that of assigning a collection of weighted
objects to boxes so each box receives a total weight that matches its target weight as closely as
possible. (An elaboration of this problem is considered in the section on tabu search.)
A learning procedure for this problem was superimposed on a class of simple constructive
heuristics of the following form:
Step J. Choose the next object to be assigned to a box (e.g. by preordering the objects).
Step 2. Choose a box to receive the selected object whose target weight minus its current weight is
maximum. (Some of these values may be negative.)
The quality of the solution obtained at the completion of such a procedure is indicated by the sum
of the absolute values of the discrepancies between the final assigned weights and the target weights. A
natural learning process, therefore, is to take these discrepancies into account on a renewed
application of the procedure. A box that receives too much weight should, for example, have its target
correspondingly adjusted to appear smaller than it actually is, inducing the method to compensate by
assigning the box less weight than before. A straightforward application of this principle was
embedded in a learning approach that adjusted each target by exactly the amount of the discrepancy
produced on the previous pass, observing that if the method were to compensate by this amount, a
perfect solution would result.
While seemingly plausible, this approach did not improve the quality of solutions obtained. More
careful reflection suggested that the adjustment on a given pass should not depend simply on the
assignment of the preceding pass, but also on the previous targets that led to this assignment. Upon
altering the procedure to take this observation into account, however, the results were again
unimpressive.
Continued search for refinement led to the supposition that as the boxes were more nearly "filled ",
the adjusted targets should be phased out and replaced by the original targets. (At the extreme, if a
box were to be assigned just one more item, then its original target would appropriately become the
basis for deciding the weight of that item.) Thus, the adjustments determined by learning were further
modified by introducing a decay factor, which permitted the influence of these adjustments to
diminish as the weight (and expected number of elements) of a box approached the original target
value. This strategy, too, did not yield improved solutions.
Finally, it was hypothesized that the decay should not be a continuous function of the current
weight or number of items in a box, but rather governed by a threshold, such that the full adjustment
should apply before reaching this threshold weight and the decay factor should only be allowed to
operate thereafter. Upon integrating this last consideration with the others, the learning strategy
abruptly succeeded and a marked improvement in solution quality resulted.
The moral of this anecdote is that learning is not a process with a single form, nor is the first
plausible form necessarily effective. More attention needs to be given to components of learning
strategies that prove useful in specific contexts in order for the value of such strategies to be realized in
practical application.
A learning experiment
Before leaving the subject of learning, there is a final area that deserves consideration. From one
perspective, learning may be viewed as a form of hindsight analysis. Yet the current studies in discrete
optimization disregard one of the most conspicuous forms of information on which hindsight may be
based: a pre-determined optimal solution (or collection of alternative optima). From another
perspective, learning may be viewed as pattern recognition with a time dimension. Integer
programming provides a natural tool for modeling problems in pattern recognition, and current
studies often also overlook the potential to employ IP in this way as a component of the learning

process.
These two elements may be conveniently elaborated in the context of branch and bound solution
strategies. Intelligent learning within the branch and bound setting may draw on several sources of
information, such as
(i)

alternative types of branching penalties,

IP and links to artificial intelligence

539

(ii) alternative meansof evaluating mutually exclusivebranches,
(iii) easily specified logical interdependencies(as in multiple choice and variable upper bound
problems),
(iv) historical data of the search,
(v) various methods for generatingtrial "completions" of the current solution.
Given the enormous wealth of potential information to accountfor, and the many ways it can be
integrated, today's researchcustomarily settles on hypothesizing the relevance of a few types of
information and a handful of decision rules, thus enabling comparisonsof only a small number of
options. But there is nothing to guide the creation of theseoptions exceptrelatively blind intuitioni.e. there is no referenceto sophisticatedmodels for combining available information and, equally
importantly, thereis no referenceto knowledgeof a solution, or setof solutions,one is trying to reach.
The following alternative scenarioinvites consideration. To begin, a massive solution effort is
applied to a representativesampleof a givenclassof problems, with the goal of obtaining optimal or
exceptionally high quality solutions. To achieve this goal, time and resourcesare expended in
amounts beyond those normally considered appropriate in a practical, day-to-day operating
environment. (For the sake of economy,the effort could begin by testing smaller problems, and
checking for the possibility of extrapolatingthe resultsto larger ones.Alternatively, attention might
first be given to settings where optimal solutions can be constructed in advance.)
The solutions determinedin the initial stageof investigation then becomea sourceof information
for the next. At this point, discreteoptimization is introduced to aid in identifying connections that
may enhancethe solution process-employing a bootstrapping operation in which a mixed IP
pattern recognitionmodeldetermineswhich evaluativefactorsare most relevant,and the weightsand
conditional relationships (including thresholds) that provide effective composite rules. (An AI
perspectivewould not frown on introducing a human "pattern recognizer"into the loop to facilitate
the process.Although perhapsnot a mainstreamtradition, OR practitioners have for years similarly
found it useful to draw on human intervention to enhancethe performanceof their models and
algorithms [13, 45, 49].
The first objective of the resulting rules is simple: to identify at leastone of the currently available
branchesthat will lead to an optimal solution. (Suchbranchesare known since an optimal solution
has already been determined.)The creation and testing of the model would occur by progressing
through a sequenceof solution stepsin which the evaluationof the modelis challengedto prescribean
appropriate next move at eachjuncture.
There is, however, a secondlevel consideration. Although a variety of branchesmay lead to an
optimal solution, some will typically lead to solution states that are exceedingly poor for
differentiating subsequentgood and bad alternatives.In other words,the amount of new information
gained by branching to such a state may be very slight. (Generally speaking, greater marginal
information is gainedby branchesthat more radically changethe state of the system.)Thus, the time
path of generatingand testing the model will be crucial to its success.
A number of strategic elements that are relevant to accommodating this consideration are
suggestedby proposals of the last dozenyears. For example,techniquesand criteria for identifying
influential variables,shrinking the branchand bound tree,performing "branch reversals",imposing
branchesby degrees,employingpseudocostsand bounds,and so forth, have alreadyshownpromise
[50-56], and would undoubtedly yield further benefitsby meansof a "hindsight" learning study to
identify their most usefulinterconnections.(It is also interestingto note that someof theseproposals
provide conceptsthat canbe usedto extendthe parallel AI searchstrategiessuchas A*, Z*, etc. [5762], which in turn broaden some elementsof the branch and bound perspective traditionally
employed in OR.)
Implementation of a learning study of this type would clearly be a challenging and ambitious
undertaking. On the other hand, such an effort would help to answermany questions that current
researchhas not thoroughly resolved: (1) Which information is most important for incorporation
into decisionrules?(2) What parametersand thresholdsshould be usedto integratethis information?
(3) What gain may be achievedby allowing the inclusion of information that is more expensiveto
generateor store? (4) What is the influence of the conditional time path of the solution (and what
parametershelp identify moves that lead to more informative states)?(5)To what extent does the

540

FRED GLOVER

discovery that a previousmove should be "redecided" playa role in the process?(6) How are the
answers to these questions affected by the class of problems examined? (7) How are outcomes
influencedby the choice of a "representative" sample (e.g.should the classbe further divided into
subclasses,and do rules for smallerproblems extrapolate to larger ones)?
Until such an investigation is undertaken, significant gaps will remain in our knowledge of the
relative value and limitations of alternative information for solving combinatorial problems.
Carefully mappedout "learning plans" of this sort should provide an important direction for future

research.

4. INDUCED DECOMPOSITION
A great deal has been written about the relevance of decomposition to problem solving, ranging
from the classical "decomposition principle" of linear programming [20, 63] to the "near
decomposability" theorems of artificial intelligence [64--66]. Though not always viewed as such,
relaxation strategies (including the familiar Lagrangean and surrogate constraint approaches)
constitute instances of the divide-and-conquer philosophy inherent in the notion of decomposition.
The same is true of restriction strategies, including the branching methods of branch and bound.
Decomposition ideas have gained added impetus as improved methods have been developed for
certain types of problem structures, particularly those associated with networks and graphs (or
matroids). In recent years attention has increasingly been given to how to identify these structures as
embedded components within larger systems [67-72], bringing with it a parallel interest in improved
procedures for integrating the solutions of subsystems with the solution of systems that encompass
them [73-79].
A related (sporadically recurring) theme in discrete optimization is now coming into sharpened
focus, and will quite probably soon rival the identification of embedded structures as a major avenue
for enhancing IP problem solving capabilities. This theme, which may be called induced
decomposition, is characterized by the goal of creating structure in discrete optimization problems
rather than simply finding it. Early examples.are the proposals for generating inequalities involving
partial and nested sums of variables-providing
exploitable information which, although not
explicit, can readily be inferred from other problem constraints [80, 81]. Additional examples are the
procedures for generating unit coefficient cuts as covering and matching inequalities [9, 12, 82].
(Such inequalities are often used, however, to augment the original system, and therefore constrain it
more tightly, rather than as part of a decomposition strategy (see, for example, [10, 13]).
Other forms of induced decomposition have arisen with the techniques used to establish the
equivalence of zero-one IP problems to zero-one generalized networks [83, 84]. These techniques
create a generalized network structure by splitting the original variables into auxiliary variables
which are linked by equal flow side constraints. (The side constraints are satisfied automatically on
imposing zero-one conditions, which yields the equivalence of the original system and the resulting
generalized network system.) Subsequent research has reinforced the interest in these structures by
the development of special procedures for networks with "equal flow" constraints [74-77].
A potentially useful adjunct to the induced decomposition framework has come about quite
recently with the formal characterization of the network creation methods in a broader context of
layering strategies [85]. These strategies make use of the fact that the manner of creating auxiliary
variables effectively partitions the problem into layers, and this in turn gives rise to a wealth of
alternatives for decomposing the system into exploitable subsystems. For example, each different way
of subdividing a set of linear inequalities into pairs creates a different decomposition into simple
generalized network components, and the system incorporating any collection of such pairs (or larger
component groupings) can be conveniently exploited by parallel processing within the layering
framework. Lagrangean relaxation also has a particularly strong form in this setting [85, 86]. Instead
of simply identifying embedded network structure, layering strategies afford the opportunity to
choose which embedded structure to extract, and allow the creation of different structures by
implicit duplication of constraints. Finally, the special form of the linking conditions produced by
these strategies gives rise to a highly natural type of relaxation/restriction approach as a means for
exploiting the induced decomposition.

IP and links to artificial intelligence

541

As the importance of creating (or "engineering") embedded structure becomesmore widely
recognized,additionalforms of induced decompositionmay be expectedto emerge.Both theoretically
and empirically, the area is still in its infancy, and otTersconsiderablepromise as a framework for
blending AI and OR perspectivesto enhancethe solution of complex problems.
5. TABU SEARCH

Tabu search may be viewed as a "meta-heuristic" superimposed on another heuristic. The
approach undertakesto transcend local optimality by a strategy of forbidding (or, more broadly,
penalizing) certain moves. The purpose of classinga move forbidden-i.e. "tabu"-is chiefly to
preventcycling. In viewof the mechanismadopted for this purpose,the approachmight alternatively
becalled "weak inhibition" search,for the movesit holds tabu are generallya small fraction of those
available,and a move losesits tabu status to becomeonce again accessibleafter a relatively short
time. (In this respectthe method may be contrasted to branch and bound, which likewise forbids
certain movesto preventcycling, but in a more rigid fashion-a form of "strong inhibition" search.)
Tabu searchoriginated as a device for implementing the oscillating assignmentstrategyof [48],
and has constituted a primary embodiment of that strategy in applications. The close practical
alliance of theseproceduresmotivates a perspective(adopted here) in which they are regardedas
synonymous. However,the specialfeaturesand rationale from which tabu searchderivesits name
have not beenclearly formulated in the literature, and the effectivenessof the method suggeststhe
appropriatenessof mending this gap. (Recentsolution statistics on the method's performanceare
indicated subsequently.)
From an AI point of view, tabu searchdeviatesto an extent from what might be expectedof
intelligent human behavior. Humans are often hypothesizedto operate according to some sort of
random (probabilistic) element which promotes a certain level of "inconsistency". The resulting
tendencyto deviatefrom a charted course,sometimesregrettedas a sourceof error, canalso prove a
source of gain. Sucha mechanismhas beenpostulated to be useful, even fundamental,to human
ingenuity.
Tabu search,on the other hand, operateswithout referenceto randomization, as though to suggest
random variation may be of value only if oneis innatelydisposedto settle for an inferior solution, and
is unequipped to find somethingbetter exceptthrough the providenceof accident. (The successof
tabu searchis not taken to be a comment on the merit of sucha perspective!)
More particularly, tabu searchproceedsaccording to the supposition that there is no value in
choosing a poor move, by accident or design, except for the purpose of avoiding a path already
examined. Subjectto this exception, the method seeksa best possiblemove at eachstep. (From a
pragmatic standpoint, "best" may be definedrelative to an abbreviatedsample, or aspiration level
search,as where a large number of candidate moves renderscomplete evaluation unattractive.)
By this orientation, the procedure initially headsdirectly to a local optimum. Local optimality,
however,is not a condition that leadsto disruption of the searchprocess(as by immediatelyinvoking
a "restart" or "shakeup" response),sincethe ability to identify a best available move remains.To
avoid retracing a path previously taken, the procedure records information about moves recently
made, employingone or more tabu lists.The function of suchlists is not to preventa move from being
repeated,but to prevent it from being reversed,and the prohibition against reversalis conditional
rather than absolute (employing criteria subsequentlyto be described).
In its most straightforward form, the tabu list constructionrecordsthe most recentmmovesof the
method,where mis a parameter.Movesaresubdividedinto typesand differentiated by direction, and
a separatetabu list is maintained for eachof thesetype/directionclassifications.For many problems,
a singletype of moveis appropriate and the numberof directionsis just two. To illustrate, consideran
integer programming problem in which a natural move is to assigna variable a value (or bound)
adjacentto a current trial value. The directions for the move might then be classifiedas "up" and
"down". Hence one tabu list would be created for the "up" moves and another for the "down"
moves.If the variable X4is on the "up" tabu list for having moved from 3 to 4, for example,then
sufficient memory is stored to prevent X4 from being moved from 4 back to 3 (unlessit satisfiesthe
conditional criteria allowing it to escapethis restriction). Note that X4may appearmore than once on
the list, aswherea previousmove from 2 to 3 may also be recorded. Likewise,X4may simultaneously

542

FRED GLOVER

be on the "down" tabu list for having moved from 6 to 5. (That is, the method for generating trial
solutions may possibly not imply that X4 must first be "moved" to 6 in order to receivethat value.
This is evident in the commonschemewherea move may consistof imposing a bound on a variable
and then generatinga trail solution by linear programming. Imposing a bound on XI may jump the
current trial value of X4 past a number of those values that would be reachedby adjacent moves.)
In context of a plant location problem, to provide another illustration, a move may be directed
from one location to another. In this case,eachmove has only one direction insteadof two. (A move
does not start at a "to" location and then move to a "from" location.) Consequently,a tabu list is
establishedto preventthesesingle direction moves from being reversed,If a plant is on the list for
having beenmoved from Location 2 to Location 3, then it is prohibited (conditionally) from moving
from Location 3 to Location 2.
Thesetwo examplesare taken from real world application of the method, the first in solving a
nonlinear covering problem [48], and the second in solving an architectural design problem
involving the location of componententities in group clusters [87]. Other commonly encountered
classesof problems (including the one for which computational results are given subsequently)
involve a move where one element,or setof elements,is exchangedfor another. For example,the
standard move of the 2-0 PT traveling salesmanheuristic deletestwo nonadjacentedgesof the tour
and then addsthe two uniquelydeterminededgesthat result in a different tour. In settingsinvolving
such exchanges,it is natural to record only part of the information about a move in order to save
memoryand time in processingthe tabu lists. A partial record for the traveling salesmanproblem, for
example,may identify just one of the two deletededges,with the effectof preventing this edgefrom
beingadded backto the tour until its residenceon the tabu list expires.Similarly, in simplersettings,a
variable may be preventedfrom moving to a particular value, or a plant from moving to a particular
location, without regard for the origin of the move.
Tabu list processing
The tabu lists are managedby recording movesin the order in which they are made. Eachtime a
new elementis added to the "end" of a list, the oldest element on the list is dropped from the
"beginning". (The list can initially be filled with dummy elementsto avoid checking whether it has
beenfilled.) Thus, tabu lists are effectivelymanagedas circular lists, whosestarting point progresses
around the circle as the new first elementreplacesthe last old one. In some discrete optimization
settings,it is possibleto identify differentmovesasequivalent,and it is important that the tabu status
of a particular move extendsto all of its equivalentcounterparts. Suchsettingsalso often allow "null"
movesthat are not in the domainconsideredby improvement heuristics,but which must be explicitly
proscribed in tabu search.For example,a zero-one knapsack problem may contain two variables
that are indistinguishable exceptfor indexing. A move that swapsone of these for the other in the
current trial solution constitutesa null move. (Two movesthat swapa differentone of thesevariables
with the samethird variable provide an instanceof equivalent moves.)
The conditional manner in which a move is prevented from being reversedis a key aspectof the
procedure. For the purpose of discussion,suppose that the reversemove, the one rightly to be
regardedtabu, is the one recorded*. At the simplestlevel,tabus status can beenforcedby meansof a
penalty which is preemptivelylarge for everymove on a tabu list, so that none of thesemoveswill be
chosenso long as a nontabu alternative exists.The penaltiesare allowed to decayas a function of
tabu list order, so that if no move is available (other than a tabu move) an older tabu move will be
chosenin preferenceto a more recentone.
The preemptivepenalty approach, however,overlooks the chief purposeof the tabu lists, which is
to preventcycling while affording flexibility. (There is more in this than meetsthe eye,for it would
seemto imply that the smallesttabu list which preventscycling would be best.Yet experiencesuggests
a slightly larger list is often better, as subsequentlynoted.)
Two approachesfaithful to this purpose,and which haveproducedsolutions of better quality than
the strictly preemptive scheme,are as follows. The first and simplest approach allows a move to~

.Organizing the approach to prevent repetition rather than reversalof a move has not proved a competitive alternative.

IP and links to artificial intelligence

543

override its tabu status provided the resulting trial solution, or a bound relating to such a solution,
improves on the best value so far obtained.
The second approach imposes a less stringent requirement for overriding tabu status, but entails
additional record keeping. To implement the approach, an aspiration list A(z) is maintained for each
value z of the objective function (over a relevant range). Translation and scaling, and mapping
fractional values into adjacent integers, are used to insure that z takes integer values from 1 to U. (By
this organization, z =:=0 is assumed to provide a lower bound on the optimum (minimum) value of z,
and all values of z > U are treated as though z = U.)
A(z) may be interpreted as the aspiration level of the objective junction value next to be reached when
the current value is z.Thus, initially, A(z) is set to z -1 for all z, indicating the aspiration of identifying
a move that will improve z at least to the value z -1. (Note, if fractional z values are rounded up, then
z -1 represents the "nearest neighbor" improvement for the true z value.) In general, the strategy of
the aspiration list is to permit a move to override its tabu status if it succeeds in improving z to the
value A(z). Execution of this strategy rests on the issue of how to update A(z).
Let z' and z" denote values of z obtained on two successiveiterations. The goal for future moves
that begin at z' is to reach a value better than z", hence the value A(z') is updated to z" -1 if z" ~ A(z'),
which is equivalent to setting A(z') = Min[A(z'), z" -1]. Moreover, since the move from z' to z"
customarily implies the existence of a reverse move from z" to z', an analogous update is employed in
this case to yield A(z") = Min[ A(z"), z' -1]. [A(z") may be updated in a different manner if the value
of z represents an objective function bound rather than an attained value.]
Thus, by the foregoing updates, as long as a move improves the current value of z to A(z) or better,
the system achieves a transition that has not previously occurred. Consequently, allowing a move to
override its tabu status under this condition is compatible with the goal of avoiding cycling.
A variation is to let the argument of the aspiration list be a parameter other than the objective
value. Denoting this parameter by y, the value A(y) may then represent the desired amount of
improvement in the objective function when y is an observed property of the move. For example, ify
represents the length of the shorter of the deleted edges in the 2-0 PT traveling salesman heuristic,
then initially A(y) = 1 for all y (which compels an improvement of at least 1). Thereafter A(y) may be
updated by the formula A(y') = Max[A(y'), z' -z" + 1] and A(y") = Max[A(y"), z" -z' + 1], where
y' is the length of the shorter edge deleted and y" is the length of the shorter edge added (capable of
being deleted in a reverse move), in the transition from z' to z". Similar observations may of course be
applied to other approaches such as the 3-0PT heuristic.,

Tabu list sizes
It may be noted that the creationof more than one tabu list can be managedby meansof a single
list, though the method may operatein a differentway if the elementsof eachlist are processedby the
same rule (whether in a combined list or separatelists). In particular, the past is forgotten at a
constantrate in the caseof a singlelist. In the caseof two or more tabu lists. however,one list may be
more active than another through a certain sequenceof moves(e.g.where "up" moves occur more
frequently than "down" moves).
The useof separatelists for differenttypes and directions of movesappearsto be advantageouson
the basis of empirical finding. Two generalconclusions concerningthe use of separatetabu lists,
which interestingly appearto be independentof the application, haveemergedfrom experiment: (1)
each tabu list should have the samevalue of m (i.e. the same size),though small variations seem
relatively unimportant; (2)the bestvalue for m is approx. 7 (though all valuesfrom 5 to 9,and up to 12
in the caseof [35], appearto work well)*.
One is prompted to note the similarity betweenthe empirically bestvaluesfor tabu list sizeand the
number of "chunks" that humanstypically carry in short term memory. It is intriguing to speculate
whether this similarity implies that empirical tests have rediscovereda principle already found by
nature-i.e. that sucha parametervalue gives an effectiveway to handle combinatorial problems by
meansof a very simple memorymechanism.(The analogyis imperfect,of course,unlesshumanscan
be shown to use short term memory in the manner of a tabu list.)
*Tabu lists containing only a singleelementcan sometimesyield solutions significantly better than a local optimum. (Seethe
knapsack example in [48], which also illustrates the interplay of feasibility and optimality considerations.)

544

FRED GLOVER

Experimentation indeed suggeststhere is some combinatorial significanceto values of m in the
range indicated. In the application cited at the conclusionof this section,values of m up to 4 were
found to admit the cycling phenomenonin which a particular sequenceof solutions would repeat
indefinitely. (For m = 4, cycle lengths were observed typically to range from 14 to 30 moves.)
Abruptly at m = 5 all evidencesof the cycling phenomenonvanished.This behavior of course must
depend to an extent on the problem setting and the handling of the tabu lists. Unless all moves
equivalentto a given tabu move are simultaneouslyclassedastabu, for example,the outcomewould
not be expected.
Additional tabu parametersand list managementrules
In somesettingsthere is value to maintaining an additional form of tabu list to preventa selected
parameter from reversing its value until a certain level is reached. For example, in scheduling
employeesto duty rosters [35], there is often interest not only in the least cost schedule,but in the
leastcostschedulefor somenumberof employeescloseto the optimum number. (The sourceof such
interestis the fact that reasonabletrade-offscanbe usedto influencehiring and lay-off policies under
alternative scenarios.)Thus another tabu parameterin this setting periodically compelsan increase
or decreasein the number of employeesscheduled,creatinga searchpattern that resemblesa seriesof
pendulumswingson both sidesof the number currently associatedwith a local optimum. This form
of tabu list control is usefulevenwheretrade-offsare not of concern:there may be only oneacceptable
number of employees,but controlled oscillations about that number can aid in finding improved
configurations. Such a behavior, which in generalinduces oscillations around "ideal" values of
various parameters(including the objective function value and measuresof feasibility) hasmotivated
the earlier use of the "oscillating assignment" label for this strategy.
In some settingswhere both feasibilityand optimality considerationsare relevant,a simple model
which is a variant of another technique from [35] may be useful.The approachis motivated by the
observationthat although infeasibility canalwaysbe handled by a penalty function, there appearsto
be a qualitative differencebetweenfeasibility and optimality for some types of problems,and this
suggestsin turn that the form of the penalty function should change according to the current
"degrees" of thesetwo components.To illustrate, supposean evaluation function E(x) of a current
(partial or complete) trial solution x is expressedin the form E(x) = aF(x) + bO(x), where F(x)
denotes a feasibility measureand O(x) representsan optimality measure. [F(x) might further be
subdivided into components to distinguish different types of feasibility, such as non-negativity,
integerfeasibility,etc.]. The purposeof segregatingF(x) and O(x)in this representationis to allow the
"qualitative differentiation" of feasibilityand optimality to be implementedby adjusting a and b as a
dynamic feature of the searchprocess.
The nature of this adjustmentcan beillustrated by referenceto the familiar "outside in" and "inside
out" heuristicprocedures.An "outside in" approach,as in [88], beginsat a distancefrom the feasible
region and changesthe values of variables(asa rule, unidirectionally) until feasibility is attained. By
contrast, an "inside out" approach, as in [89], starts from inside the feasible region (after an
initialization step,if required) and changesvalues of variables until no improving changesremain
except that would force an exit from this region.
Manipulating the a and b parameters,and using standard tabu lists to avoid cycling, provides a
convenientmechanismfor progressingbeyondthe normal domain of thesetwo procedures-giving a
flexible method to approach and then cross beyond the feasibleboundaries from either side. The
parametersmay for examplebe usedto governthe depth of penetrationbeyond (or into) the feasible
region before instituting a reverse trajectory back toward the periphery. In the spirit of the AI
perspective,this manipulation of weights offers an opportunity to employ an adaptive aspiration
strategy, narrowing the parameterrangesabout values that uncovergood solutions (in the regions
wherethis occurs),and thenwidening the rangesaftera duration in which no improved solutions are
located. Sucha dynamic manipulation of a and b enablesrelatively simplefunctions F(x) and O(x)to
behaveas muchmore subtle functions,which are not readilyexpressiblein closedmathematicalform.
The differentiation of feasibility and optimality can also be applied to problems where feasibility
and optimality have beenabsorbedinto a single measureby the problem formulation, and hence
supposedly offer no basis for separateconsideration. In the goal programming model for the
constrainedclustering problem of [87], for example,it was found desirableto accentuatedeviation

IP and links to artificial intelligence

545

penaltiesin regionsquite closeto the goals (creatinga concaverelationship!), in spite of the fact that
this distorted the influence of alternative moves on the true objective function. From a general
perspective,the feasibilityjoptimality division may of coursebe subdividedfurther, asto differentiate
integer feasibility from inequality conditions or to isolate the effectsof different objective function
measures. Alternatively, the division may be replaced by divisions representing a procedural
orientation,as in choosingamongconstructive,destructiveand swappingmoves(or, more generally,
various classesof state change and state preservation moves). Exploration of effective ways to
manipul!lte the parameters in thesesettings might usefully be carried out in the framework of the
"Learning Experiment" suggestedin Section3.
Finally, it should be remarked that it is possible, by more elaborate record keeping and list
managementrules, to rigorously assurethat every possible solution will ultimately be examined,
without cycling, while retaining the ability to chooseanynonproscribedmove (without referenceto a
branch and bound type of tree structure)."Such a method was tested for the nonlinear covering
problem of [48}, where the movesconsistedof increasingand decreasingvaluesof integervariables
within their bounds.The outcomedisclosedthat the more elaborate list managementschemewasless
effectivethan the simpler memorymechanismof maintaining the tabu lists as circular data structures.
Such an outcome might be expectedby an orientation that favors more flexible searchforms. Yet
there remain many settingsto which tabu searchhasnot yet beenapplied,and the potential relevance
of such variants should not prematurely be discounted.
Computationaloutcomesfor tabu search
Previousindications of the effectiveness
of tabu searchare given in [35, 48,87], but theseresultsdo
not isolate the effectsof tabu searchfrom other tandem strategies (such as decomposition and
decisionrule integration). By focusing on applications rather than methodologies,previous studies
have also not disclosedthe relationship betweenlocal optima obtained by a specifiedheuristic and
the solutions obtained by tabu searchwhen employing the sameclass of moves. We report such
resultsherefor a setof problems from a realworld settinginvolving the optimization of channelloads
in a computer processingenvironment.The form of theseproblemshas beendescribedin Section3 in
the guiseof assigningweightedobjectsto boxes,where the goal is to minimize the total deviation of
assignedweights from target weights. In the setting of channel load optimization, the problems
include additional constraintslimiting the numberof objects (disk packs)that eachbox (channel)can
receIve.
The type of move selectedto be the commondenominator of the basic improvementheuristic and
the tabu searchprocedure consistedsimply of exchanging an object in one box with an object in
another. By means of zero-weight "pseudo objects" this move definition was allowed to include
referenceto half-swapsthat transferredan object from one box to another without a reversetransfer.
The selectionof moveswasrestrictedto thesehalf-swapsso long asa bound on the numberof objects
in a box wasviolated, requiringthat the currentchoiceameliorate sucha bound violation. Similarly,
no moves that created a bound violation were permitted in the version of the heuristic employed.
To embed this characterization of moves in the tabu search framework, a "null move" was
identified to be one that exchangedobjects of equal weights. "Equivalent moves" were defined
relative to the same underlying principle, which in a strict implementation would identify two
moves as equivalent if they transferred the samerespectiveweights betweentwo specifiedboxes.
(Equivalencewould not be based on the differenceof the weights since,while equal differences
create the samerespectivechangesin the weights of the two boxes, they may also create different
compositions of the boxes.)Theseconsiderationswere simplified, however,by storing information
only for one of the boxes involved in an exchange,causinga tighter tabu restriction but avoiding
referenceto orderedpairs. Thus, equivalentmoveswereidentified by the simple expedientof flagging
all weights equal to the tabu weight in the selectedbox, and allowing only unflaggedweights to be
candidates for exchanges,exceptwhere the aspiration list prescribedotherwise.
Sixteendifferent testproblemsweresuppliedby the Division of AdvancedData Technologyof the
U.S. Bureau of Land Managementas the basis for a preliminary study. Formulated as zero-one
mixed integer programs, theseproblems contained 144zero-one variables,8 continuous variables
and 40constraints. (In spite of their modestsize,they were not trivial, as will shortly be seen.)For the
preliminary study, the basic heuristic and its tabu searchelaboration were applied to nine starting

546

FRED GLOVER

solutions: the three best, three worst and three "middle" solutions generated by the learning
approach of Section 3 without consideration for bound violations. (The worst solutions were
generally those used to seedthe learning process,or obtained in early iterations of the process.
"Duplicates" with the samesum of deviations from targets were weededout before selectingthese
solutions asa starting point for subsequentsearch.)It should be noted that the quality of the starting
solutions relative to the learningprocedure,which disregardedbounds on the numbersof itemsto be
assignedto a box, doesnot translate directly into a measureof quality for the more generalproblems.
Summarystatisticsof the nine solution trials for eachtest problem appearin Table 1. Tabu list sizes
were basedon m = 7 and valuesin the table are reported to the nearestone-tenth.Table 1 showsthe
dramatic differencebetweenlocal optima found by the iterative improvement heuristicand solutions
obtained by tabu search.The overall averagefor the local optima exceedsthat for tabu searchby a
factor of nearly 15to 1. (Theaverageof the ratios for the bestsolutions of eachis approx. 6 to 1.)The
best of the local optima proved superior to the worst of the tabu searchsolutions for only two
problems (No.3 and No.5). It is also interesting to note the significantly greater stability of tabu
search,whose solution rangeswere much tighter than those for the local optima.
An additional result of interestfrom the preliminary studyprovides a comparisonof tabu searchto
the commercialmixed IP codeMPS. Becausethe quality of the final solution obtained by tabu search
seemedlittle affectedby the starting solution, the initialization of the method wassimplified by giving
it the bestand the worst seedsolutions for the learning method, eliminating the preliminary learning
procedure entirely. (Sincethis proceduredisregardedthe bounds on the numbers of objects in the
boxes,no correspondencebetweenspecificstarting solutions and final solutions had beenobserved.)
A test was then conducted on an additional problem selectedby the Bureauof Land Management
from the sameclass. Using a Honeywell DPS-8 computer, the tabu searchprocedure took 4 CPU
secondsand obtained a solution with an objective function value of 1.0.The MPS code, by contrast,
was taken off the machine after 600 CPU seconds,having obtained a solution with an objective
function value of 21.0.
6. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS

Within the limited spaceof this article it has not beenpossibleto cover all of the areasof discrete
optimization that are likely to benefit from a blend of OR and AI perspectives.Nor has it been
possibleto give due credit to all the researchthat is likely to significantly influencethe shapeof things
to come.
Notably lacking in this portrayal of important developmentsaheadhas beena detailed look at the
fonDS of models that will go hand-in-hand with determining improved strategies. (The
"bootstrapping" mixed IP modelsmentioned in connectionwith the hindsight learning strategies,for
example,can take a variety offonns, and the identification of the more usefuloneswill be a worthy

Table Objective function values
Problem

Range

Average
Local opt

Tabu search

-"

3

4
5
6
7
8
9
10

II
12

13
14
15
16

Overall averages:

2.3
2.0

1.8

1.6

2.0
2.1
2.1

2.4
2.6
2.3

1.0
1.7
2.1
2.8

1.8
2.0
2.0

IP and links to artificial intelligence

547

contribution.) The variety of OR models [25,90-95] are already appearingthat are challengingthe
assumptionsof classicalstatistical approaches,and such developmentsare central to the pattern
recognition concerns that naturally attend learning strategies.
There is a circular chain of effect in AIlOR innovations, in which models and methods each
influence the other, laying a foundation for mutually reinforcing advances.The phenomenonis
evident in eachof the areascoveredin this paper, but perhapsnowheremore conspicuouslythan in
the induced decompositionstrategies,which must rely intimately on the interplay betweenmodels
and methods to achieve their maximum potential.
While at presentthere appearto be many constituentsof effectiveheuristic procedures,the time is
perhapsapproaching where,as in physics,it is appropriate to begindevising GUTs (grand unifying
theories)to bind diverseelementstogether. In the combinatorial problem solving setting,the gains
that derive from effectivemethods now emergingwill undoubtedly stimulate the searchfor common
denominators.As this occurs,the largelysegregatedperspectivesof the pastwill increasinglygive way
to more unified views, openingdramatic and exciting possibilities for future developments.
REFERENCES
1. R. S. Garfinkel and G. L. Nemhauser,Integer Programming.Wiley, New York (1972).
2. E. L. Lawler, CombinatorialOptimization: Networks and Matroids. Holt, Rinehart & Winston, New York (1976).
3. C. H. Papadimitriou and K. Steiglitz,CombinatorialOptimization:Algorithm andComplexity. Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, N.J. (1982).
4. R. T. Rockafellar, Convex Analysis. Princeton University Press(1970).
5. H. M. Salkin, Integer Programming.Addison-Wesley, Reading,Mass. (1975).
6. H. D. Sheraliand C. M. Shetty,Optimizationwith DisjunctiveConstraints.LectureNotes in Economicsand Mathematical
Systems,Vol. 81. Springer, Berlin (1980).
7. S. Zionts, Linear and Integer Programming.Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J. (1974).
8. E. Balas,Disjunctiveprogramming. In DiscreteOptimation(Edited by P. L. Hammer,E. L.Johnson and B. H. Korte), pp.
3-52. North-Holland, Amsterdam(1979).
9. G. H. Bradley, P. L. Hammer and L. A. Wolsey, Coefficientreduction for inequalitiesin <f-l variables. Math. Progr. 7,
263-282(1974).
10. H. Crowder, E. Johnsonand M. Padberg,Solving large scale<f-llinear programmingproblems. OpnsRes. 31, 803-934
(1983).
11. M. Guignard and K. Spielberg,Propagation, penalty improvementand use of logical inequalities. Math. Opns Res.25,
157-171 (1977).
12. M. W. Padberg,Covering, packing and knapsackproblems. Ann. Discr. Math. 4, 265-287(1982).
13. T. J. van Roy and L. A. Wolsey,A softwaresystemfor mixed integer programming by reformulating automatically using
cuts. Talk at sessionTA7, llMS XXVI meeting in Copenhagen(1984).
14. L. A. Wolsey, Facets and strong valid inequalities for integer programs. OpnsRes.24, 367-372 (1976).
15. E. Balas, Disjunctive programming and a hierarch of relaxations for discrete optimization problems. Management
ResearchReport No. MSRR-492,Carnegie-Mellon University (1983).
16. M. S. Bazaraaand C. M. Shetty, Foundations of Optimization. Springer, Berlin (1976).
17. A. M. Geoffrion, Lagrangean relaxation for integer programming. In Mathematical Programming, Study2. NorthHolland, Amsterdam(1974).
18. M. Held, P. Wolfe and H. D. Crowder, Validation of subgradient optimization Math. Progr. 6,62-88 (1974).
19. M. H. Karwan and R. L. Rardin, SomerelationshipsbetweenLagrangianand surrogate duality in integerprogramming.
Math. Progr. 18, 32<f-334(1979).
20. L. Lasdon, Optimization Theoryfor Large Systems.Macmillan, New York (1970).
21. M. L. Fisher, R. Jaikumar and J. T. Lester III, A computerizedvehicle routing application. Report No. 81-10-03,The
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania(1981).
22. B. Gavish and H. Pirkul, Efficient algorithms for solving multiconstraint zero-one knapsack problems to optimality.
Math. Progr. 31, 78-105 (1985).
23. A. M. Geoffrionand G. W. Graves,Multicommidity distribution systemdesignby bendersdecomposition. Mgmt Sci. 20,
822-844 (1974).
24. F. Glover, D. Klingman, N. Philips and G. T. Ross, Integrating modeling, algorithm design and computational
implementation to solvea largescalenonlinear mixed integerproblem. CBDA 104,The University of Texas,Austin, Tex.
(1984).To be published in Ann. Opns Res.
25. J. M. Mulvey and H. P. Crowder, Cluster analysis: an application of Lagrangianrelaxation. Mgmt Sci. 2S, 329(1979).
26. E. Balas,Disjunctive programming: cutting-planesfrom logical conditions. In Nonlinear Programming(Edited by O. L.
Mangasarian,R. R. Meyer and S. M. Robinson),Vol. 2, pp. 279-312. Academic Press,New York (1975).
27. R. G. Jeroslow,Cutting-plane theory: disjunctive methods. Ann. Discr. Math. I, 293-330 (1977).
28. R. G. Jeroslow,Representabilityin mixed integer programming,I: Characterizationresults.Georgia Tech., Atlanta, Ga
(1984).
29. R. G. Jeroslow and J. K. Lowe, Modelling with integer variables. College of Management, Georgia Institute of
Technology (1985).To be published in Math. Progr. Stud.
30. R. R. Meyer, Integer and mixed-integer programming models: general properties. J. Opt. TheoryAppl. 16, 191-206
(1975).
31. F. Glover, J. Hultz and D. Klingman, Improved computer-basedplanning techniques,part II. Interfaces9, 12-20 (1979).

548
32.

FRED GLOVER

F.

Glover

Soc.

and

3S,

F.

Martinson,

605--616

33.

H. J. Greenberg,

34.

Energy Models
H. J. Greenberg

A netform

system

for resource

planning

in the U.S.

Bureau

to analyze

information

contained

in a model

of Land

Management.

J. Opl

Res.

(1984).

A new approach

(Edited by S. I. Glass), pp. 517-524.
and J. S. Maybee, Computer-Assisted

In Validation

and Assessment

NBS Pub. 569, Washington,
D.C. (1979).
Analysis and Model Simplification.
Academic

Issues

Press, New

of

York

(1981).
35.

F.

36.

Glover

and

13,

563-573

D.

S.

C.

McMillan,

The

general

employee

scheduling

problem:

an

integration

AT&T

Bell

of

MS

and

AI.

Comput.

Opns

Res.

(1986).

Johnson,

Optimization

International

by

Symposium

on

simulated

annealing:

Mathematical

Jr and M.

a

Programming

Laboratories.

Presented

at

the

12th

37.

S. Kirkpatrick,

X. Gelatt

38.

N. Metropolis,

A. Rosenbluth,

39.

machines. J. chern. Phys. 21, 1087 (1953).
B. L. Golden and C. C. Skiscim,
Using simulated

40.

Maryland,
F. Romeo

41.

Department
of EECS, University
of California,
Berkley, Calif. (1985).
W. Crowston,
F. Glover, G. Thompson
and J. Trwick,
Probabilistic
and parametric

42.
43.
44.

scheduling
problem.
GSIA, Carnegie Institute
of Technology
(1964).
F. Glover, A strategy for traveling
salesman problems.
GSIA, Carnegie Institute
of Technology
(1964).
S. Lin, Computer
solutions
to the traveling
salesman problem.
Bell Syst. Tech. J. 44, 2245-2269
(1965).
B. L. Golden and W. R. Stewart, The empirical analysis ofTSP
heuristics..In
The Traveling Salesman Problem

(Edited

45.

E. L. Lawler, J. K. Lenstra and A. H. G. Rinnooy
P. Krolak, W. Felts and G. Marble, A man-machine

Commun.

46.

ACM
E. L.

Optimization

47.

Amsterdam
(1985).
G. L. Thompson,
Approaches

48.

(1985).
F. Glover,

49.

C. A.

M. Rosenbluth,

by simulated

A. Teller and E. Teller,
annealing

College of Business and Management,
Working
and A. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli,
Probabilistic

14, 327-344 (1971).
Lawler, J. K. Lenstra

Heuristics

Trauth

R-66-925

P. Vecchi,

tutorial.

(1985).

and

R.

and A.

to solving

for integer
E.

H.

Woolsey,

G.

Kan

(Eds),

The

traveling

using surrogate

aspects

routing

and location

problems.

learning

of integer

Traveling

salesman problems.

constraints.

linear

and

Sandia

of

applications.

for the job shop

problem.

Problem.

by

North-Holland,

Carnegie-Mellon

Decis. Sci. 8, 156-166

programming.

University

methods

Salesman

(1983).

by fast computing

(1984).
Properties

Kan). North-Holland,
Amsterdam
(1985).
approach toward solving the traveling salesman

Rinnooy

programming

to solve

Science 220,671-680

of state calculations

Paper Series MS/S 84-001
hill climbing
algorithms:

large and symmetric

Practical

annealing.

Equation

University

(1977).

Corporation

Monograph,

SC-

(1966).

50.

M.

S. Bazaraa

51.

F.

Glover,

52.
53.

F. Glover and L. Tangedahl,
Dynamic
Strategies for branch and bound. Omega 4, 571-576 (1976).
M. M. Kostreva,
Adaptive
estimates improve
binary programming.
Research Publication
GMR-3217,

Mathematics

54.

Department,
General Motors
Research Laboratories,
Waren, Mich. (1980).
R. E. Marsten,
User's manual for ZOOM/XMP.
Department
of Management

University

Arizona
55.

R.

E.

Mitra,

155--170

57.
58.

T.

Elshafei,
branch

L.

algorithms.

Cambridge,
G.

A. N.

On
and

the

use of fictitious

bound.

Omega

bounds

6,

145-152

in tree

search

algorithms.

Mgmt

Sci.

23, 904-908

(1977).

(1978).

Information

Systems,

of

(1984).

Marsten,

bound

56.

and

Parametric

Morin

and

Paper

presented

Mass.

(1985).

Investigation

of

some

K.

S. Nagarai,
at

the

Using
12th

a posteriori

bounds

International

branch-and-bound

strategies

to improve

Symposium

for

the

solution

on

of

the

performance

Mathematical

of branch-and-

Programming.

mixed-integer

programs.

Math.

Progr.

4,

(1973).

J. R. Anderson,
The Architecture
A. Barr and E. A. Feigenbaum,

of Cognition.
The Handbook

Harvard
University
Press, Cambridge,
Mass. (1983).
of Artificial
Intelligence,
Volume I. Department
of Computer

Stanford
University,
HeurisTech
Press, Stanford, Calif.; William
Kaufmann,
Inc., Los Altos,
59. N. J. Nilsson, Principles
of ArtifICial Intelligence.
SRI International,
Tioga Publishing
Company,
60. J. Pearl, Heuristics:
Intelligent
Search Strategies for Computer Problem Solving. Addison-Wesley,

E. Rich, ArtifICial
Intelligence.
The University
of Texas at Austin, McGraw-Hili,
New York (1983).
P. H. Winston,
ArtifICial
Intelligence,
2nd edition.
Artificial
Intelligence
Laboratory,
MIT, Addison-Wesley,

63.
64.

Mass. (1984).
G. B. Dantzig,
P. J. Courtois,

65.

H. A.

66.

H. A. Simon

Simon,

Science,

Calif. (1981).
Palo Alto, Calif. (1980).
Reading, Mass. (1984).

61.
62.

Reading,

Linear Programming
and Extensions.
Princeton
University
Press, Princeton,
N.J. (1963).
Decomposability,
Queueing and Computer Applications.
Academic
Press, New York (1977).
The Science

of the Artificial.

M.IT

and A.

Aggregation

of variables

Ando,

Recent algorithms

In Progress
68. R. E. Bixby

in Combinatorial
Optimization
(Edited
and W. H. Cunningham,
Converting

69.

(1980).
R. E. Bixby and D. Wagner,

for two versions

Press, Cambridge,

67. R. E. Bixby,

An almost

linear-time

Sciences, Rice University
(1985).
R. D. McBride
and R. K. Wood,

in dynamic

of graph

Mass.
systems.

realization

(1969).
Econometrica

and remarks

29,111-138

on applications

algorithm

70.
71.

problems.
L. Schrage, Math.
On hidden
Progr. structures
32, 11-31 in (1985).
linear programs.

72.

X. Greenberg
K. Truemper,

73.

National
Meeting (1983).
A. Ali, E. Allen, R. Barr and J. Kennington,

74.

algorithms.
Technical
Report 83-PR-2, Southern
Methodist
I. Ali, J. Kennington
and B. Shetty, The equal flow problem.

Extracting

for graph realization.
embedded

In Computer

Assisted Analysis

and X. Maybee).
Academic
Press, New York (1981).
How to detect hidden networks and totally-unimodular
Reoptimization

Technical

".
generalized

subsections

procedures

Report

networks
and Model

(1961).

to linear programming.

by W. R. Pulleyblank),
pp. 39-67 (1984).
linear programs
to network problems.
Math.

Mathematical
G. G. Brown,

from

Opns Res. S, 321-327
85-2, Department
linear

programmmg

Simplification

(Edited

of linear programs.

TIMS/ORSA

...
vanable

simplex

for bounded

University
(1984).
Technical
Report 85-OR-l,

Southern

primal

of

by

.
Jomt
network

...
Methodist
University

(1985).
75.

t

MIT,

C. H. Chen and M. Engquist, A primal simplex approach
for Cybernetic
Studies, University
of Texas (1985).

to pure processing

networks.

Research

Report

CCS 496, Center

76. M. Engquist and C. H. Hen, Computational comparison of two solution proceduresfor allocation/processingnetworks.
To be published in Math. Progr. Study.
77. R. McBride, Solving generalizedprocessing network problems. Working Paper, School of Business,University of
California, Los Angeles,Calif. (1982).
78. R. McBride, Solving embeddedgeneralizednetwork problems. Eur. J. OpnsRes. 21,82-92 (1985).
79. R. T. Rockafellar, Network Flows and Monotropic Optimization. Wiley, New York (1984).
80. F. Glover, A multiphase-dualalgorithm for the zero-one integer programming problem. Opns Res. 13,879-919 (1965).
81. P. L. Hammer, E. L. Johnson, B. H. Korte and G. L. Nemhauser,Studiesin Integer Programming.North-Holland,
Amsterdam (1977).
82. P. L. Hammer, E. L. Johnsonand V. N. Peled,Facets of regular 0-1 polytopes. Math. Progr. 8, 179-2<Xi(1975).
83. F. Glover and J. Mulvey, Equivalence of the 0-1 integer programming problem to discrete generalized and pure networks.
Opns Res. 28, 829-835 (1980).

84. V. Srinivasanand G. L. Thompson,Stoppedsimplex algorithm for the set partitioning problem with transportation-like
subproblems. Presentedat the ORSA/TIMS Conference,Boston, Mass. (1974).
85. F. Glover and D. Klingman, Layering strategies of creating exploitable structure in linear and integer programs. CBDA
199, The University of Texas, Austin, Tex. (1984).

86. M. Guignard-Spielberg,Lagrangeandecomposition: an improvement over Lagrageanand surrogate duals. Technical
Report No. 62, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania(1984).
87. F. Glover, C. McMillan and B. Novick, Interactive decisionsoftwareand computer graphicsfor architecturaland space
planning. CAAI Report No. 85-3, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colo. (1985). To be published in Ann. Opns Res.
88. S. Senju and Y. Toyoda, An approach to linear programming with 0-1 variables. Mgmt Sci. 15, B196-207(1968).
89. G. A. Kochenberger,B.A. McCarl andF. P. Wyman, A heuristicfor generalintegerprogramming. Decis.Sci. 5, 36(1974).
90. T. S. Arthanari and Y. Dodge, Mathematical Programmingin Statistics. Wiley, New York (1981).
91. S. M. Bajgier and A. V. HilI, An experimental comparison of statistical and linear programming approachesto the
discriminant problem. Decis.Sci. 13, 604-618(1982).
92. N. Freed and F. Glover, Evaluatingalternativelinear programmingapproachesto the discriminantproblem. MSRS 85-5,
University of Colorado. To be published in Decis.Sci.
93. J. M. Liittschwager and C. Wang, Integerprogramming solution ofa classificationproblem. Mgmt Sci. 24, 1515(1978).
94. M. R. Rao, Cluster analysisand mathematicalprogramming. J. Am. statist. Ass. 66, 622 (1971).
95. H. P. Williams, Model Building in MathematicalProgramming.Wiley, New York (1978).
96. N. Christofides and S. Eilon, Algorithm for large scaleTSP's. OpnsRes. Q. 23, 511 (1972).

